i think it's very important that history
regards this this episode fairly because
canadians uh americans people all over
the world
in the free world have been subjected to
unprecedented government tactics
right the censorship the segregation the
psychological manipulation and if that
narrative somehow prevails and it
suggests that it saved lives
then then we will never fully
get our democracy back and we will never
fully go back to normal and those are
two propositions that i find
unacceptable we have to get our
democracy back we have to go back to
normal
hello everyone
as you may or may not know and probably
don't
canada
is in the midst of a leadership race for
its federal conservative party the
federal conservatives in canada are
generally
the second most likely political party
in canada to
govern at the federal and the provincial
levels
recently
as a consequence of the
aftermath of the truckers convoy the
conservative party blew up in some sense
in canada the leader resigned and a new
slate of contenders is now vying for
leadership position i spoke with one of
them
recently pierre pauliev who's currently
the front runner and i extended an
invitation to the other candidates to
speak with me
mr roman babber took me up on that he's
currently as i said a candidate for
leadership of canada's federal
conservative party
he's a former member of ontario's
provincial parliament
he was removed most infamously by
ontario premier doug ford from that
provincial government caucus
after calling out the collateral harm of
lockdowns in january 2021
since then mr bobber has been a staunch
advocate
in favor of a balanced covid response
and such emergency responses and in
particular
against lockdowns due to their toll on
the health and mental health of
canadians
roman also brought legislation to cut
mpp member of provincial parliament pay
to canadian emergency response benefit
levels while emergency orders are in
place commenced and is in litigation
against the attorney general of ontario
over canadians right to protest and
worship outdoors and recently put
forward a bill to outlaw workplace
mandates
he is running for leader of the
conservative party of canada because he
does not wish to quote sit back while
canadians are losing faith in canada's
democracy and canadian opportunity
thank you very much mr babber for coming
to talk to me today and i'm looking
forward to a provocative discussion
good to be with you jordan
so let's start with
let's start with uh a question that i
thought was handled very badly by the
conservatives during the last federal
debate
the debate was
during the election that trudeau
precipitously called the debate was
framed around five issues and one of the
things i thought the conservatives did
extraordinarily badly was to allow the
progressives essentially to dictate the
terms of the debate to dictate the
topics and so one of the things i wanted
to ask you you're contending for
leadership of the conservative party and
hypothetically for
prime ministership of canada
what do you think the most crucial
issues facing canadians
today are
i think like in much of the western
world it's the erosion of canada's
democracy
that i fear very much and that propelled
me to uh enter into this race
i'm seeing unprecedented erosion whether
it's by way of censorship we have two or
three pieces of legislation in canada
seeking to abridge uh freedom of speech
we have regulators uh coming down on on
membership uh we have obviously social
media giants also censoring speech
then as as many of you know uh i have
been uh very saddened by the fact that
close to 20 of canadians are treated as
effectively second-class citizens
um i made the choice that most canadians
have made but that doesn't mean that we
should impose our choice on others in
fact we've never done that as as western
civilization
we're seeing an unlawful invocation of
the emergencies act that was predicated
in in false propositions uh voted on
after the alleged emergency was over uh
clearly without meeting the matter of
the law which suggests that you don't
need it if you have other legislation to
deal with so uh jordan i think that uh
if you don't have democracy you don't
have anything
and um i'm very very concerned about
where we're headed
so what what makes you think that this
concern is warranted i mean you're
you're from the former soviet union so
if you have experience with such things
that your family does certainly um
you talked about censorship we could go
into that with bill c-11 in particular
which is a stunningly overreaching piece
of legislation no matter how you slice
it and will be absolutely impossible to
impose what makes you think that
we're actually facing
something serious in canada in
relationship to our democratic freedoms
and
why should people assume that this isn't
just a you know what what a scandalous
talking point that the conservatives are
using to drum up interest in the
leadership race what do you see
happening
as as they would say in latin uh look
you said look at her it speaks for
itself you see it before your very eyes
government is passing legislation which
would dictate which would manipulate
what canadians see online
giving the crtc which is our broadcast
regulator even more power
to to determine what we may and we're
not may not see we see government also
picking winners and losers in the media
in that it uh we we know that we have we
do not have effectively
free and independent media in canada
because it's heavily subsidized uh the
government bailed out the media a couple
years ago and and continues with annual
subsidies how can you have free and
independent media when the media signs
the gov when the government signs its
paycheck yeah well let's drill let's
let's drill down into that a little bit
so
the canadian federal government
subsidizes the cbc to the tune of
between 1.2 and 1.5 billion dollars a
year
for a shrinking market of virtually no
viewers and then seems to also
in some sense collude with the cbc to
produce news pieces that are in keeping
with government legislation and then to
refer to those pieces of legislation for
proof that the legislation being covered
was actually necessary to begin with and
then there's this broader pattern of
subsidizing media in general and to me
this is reminiscent of what's
technically termed fascism because
fascism comes from fascists to bind
together and fascism is collusion of
elites right so government
media corporation colluding together to
produce a kind of monolith
um
what would pierre paulie have on my
podcast when i interviewed him
famously or infamously said that he
would defund the cbc
and so what's your take on on that from
a policy perspective
so it's important for viewers as you
mentioned to understand i was born in
the former soviet union and we didn't
leave until i was almost nine i still
have a very good recollection um about
that communist regime specifically there
was a newspaper called pravda
pravda means truth in in the russian
language and so pravda would be
plastered all over walls and buildings
and subway stations and it would
essentially be government talking points
and what we've seen particularly in last
two or three years is that government
was effectively repeating uh sorry media
was effectively repeating government
talking points uh particularly as it as
it came uh to to the public health
exercise
but i would say beyond that so we we
don't only have this funding of the cbc
which i will end before lunchtime uh we
also have bailouts and subsidies of of a
number of other stakeholders in the
media and on top of that we're now
seeing an unprecedented uh
move for for media buys government has
become one of the biggest advertisers on
all uh news and and media platforms and
and there's an old rule like in the ad
game he or she who who pays for the ad
gets their narrative across and so i
would not just defund the cbc i will
also end the bailouts and the subsidies
and i will limit the way that government
is able to advertise on all platforms uh
you you you i'm sure your viewers fully
uh agree and understand that free and
independent media is the most one of the
most important checks and balances we
have in our democracy because it is in
fact vested with the responsibility to
put a check in government something
we're simply not seeing in canada which
i think in in large part resulted in the
catastrophe that i've alleged has
transpired over the last two years
yeah well you you know we had we have
the continual suspension of parliament
in canada which is a catastrophe that's
now being extended essentially another
year in an absolutely unprecedented and
unwarranted move
and so the possibility for genuine
opposition to to the trudeau
government's policies has been
dramatically reduced on the
parliamentary front and now we have this
situation where the press which and even
the cbc in years past was at least under
some circumstances and
what would you say an effective critic
critic of the of the of governmental
policies both federal and provincial and
also saw that as their sacred duty let's
say that seems to have gone entirely by
the wayside and so that means canadians
are in a position i saw this with the
truckers convoy
you know when trudeau called them
misogynists and bigots
um and that they were attempting in some
sense to foment a coup
my sense that was that canadians had a
really hard option in front of them
which was to either decide that their
prime minister was a complete liar and
that the federal government had become
untrustworthy as an institution along
with all the legacy media outlets
or that the truckers were reprehensible
misogynists and bigots and many
canadians decided
to
take the latter stance but it's not
surprising to me because our
institutions have been pretty sound for
about 150 years and it's a bitter pill
for canadians to swallow to understand
that that in some real sense may no
longer be the case
you cannot underestimate the role that
the media plays in in everyday canadian
discourse you said yourself at the
commencement of this interview that
conservatives have difficulty uh uh
reframing the debate in fact liberals
framed the debate very very well and so
it seems like we're fighting every
election on their ground instead of
talking about issues that may be
important to us uh and so there's no
question that that media has um
a large uh part in in how the daily
conversation goes on which is why it's
so important that we keep it independent
and objective by by ending all financial
relationship between government and the
media but back to the truckers
jordan everything the trudeau government
said about the ottawa convoy turned out
to be false
the arson the arson was not connected
but there were no weapons that was a
huge lie man there was no weapons found
anywhere near the site
uh there was very little foreign funding
about 10 to 12 and all of it was with
small donations and there was no foreign
collusion
and and
it's on the strength of those
misrepresentations that a lot of
canadians formed public opinion
and on the strength of those
misrepresentations that the government
tried to justify the invocation of the
emergencies act which is the successor
of the war measures act that that hasn't
been invoked uh since since the 70s uh
and and so this particular piece of
legislation was was a vote for the first
time this is um
of course an upfront to democracy but
it's important and how you stated that
it was in fact the cbc that raised the
prospect of foreign collusion
and
one or two cabinet ministers pointed to
evidence in the media
in support of their suggestion that
there was foreign collusion so the the
government is is funding the media the
media is is speculating and and is often
wrong the government is predicating
action on the basis of such media
speculation and then justifies it's it's
invasive and and very undemocratic
action so i i think we're we're in real
trouble thing here and we've got to
rethink all of this
and while trudeau it seems to me that
trudeau believes his own press releases
in some real sense and i'm not actually
quite as cynical about that as i might
be because
i don't think it's possible to generate
a web of deception around you a web of
instrumental deception around you
and simultaneously maintain your
distance from that
and so i think when he feeds stories to
the cbc and then the cbc feeds them back
he believes it it's not merely cynical
it's that he's trapped up in his own web
of deception
i i think we've we've been seen last
last couple of years uh one of the
hallmarks of of authoritarian regimes is
that they uh peddle half truths or
um things that that often are not true
but
but quite often they tend to believe in
the system that the people around them
uh are are made to
buy into those half truths uh because
that essentially strengthens the system
uh and and we've seen that largely in
our in our public health exercise we've
seen for instance that the and even i'm
talking about
objective facts facts that we understood
pretty well for instance we knew that
the modeling was not reliable the
modeling was consistently uh overly
aggressive they would meet some of the
metrics like like cases but we
understood very early that the factor by
which you have to multiply uh all the
categories we're interested in like
hospitalizations or deaths was
constantly overstated and but but
despite that um even though time and
time again the modelers were wrong the
government continued to
uh
this pervasive fear
this this belief that uh we have to
continue down this very aggressive path
of mitigation that of course resulted in
a catastrophe um well in a catastrophe
that hasn't ended yet because the fact
that we disrupted supply chains we're
still gonna pay for that and i was
thinking the other day too you know
because
we locked everything down around the
whole world that also meant that
political leaders didn't get to meet
face to face and so in some real sense
putin for example was taken out of the
face-to-face discussions that might have
also otherwise occurred for a period of
a couple of years and god only knows
what that did to savage russia western
relationships so we like the
consequences of this lockdown have not
by any stretch of the imagination come
to an end yet now you got
you got tossed out of the doug ford
conservative provincial caucus because
of your vociferous objection to the
lockdown so let's let's go into that for
for a bit what happened there and
why why did it come to blows so to speak
and
and what's that what's been the
consequence of that for you and what
should canadians think about that
i started feeling a lot more optimistic
about
the risk of covid early in may 2020.
public health came in and said look
first of all 80 percent almost 80
percent of everyone that regretfully
passed away were in long-term care homes
and cognitive settings said okay that's
that's of course tragic so let's focus
our resources on long-term care into
infection protocol and control instead
of locking down healthy people and
making them sick the second element we
learned very early is that the virus was
considerably more transmissible than we
thought and that was actually good news
because that meant that there was the
infection rate was considerably higher
than previously thought and that means
that the metrics that we're worried
about like hospitalizations like like
deaths like mortality is significantly
lower
and
of course i thought that we're going to
potentially pivot our response because
there's no question that locking down
healthy people delaying their surgeries
canceling cancer screenings and of
course locking down the economy is
probably not going to be good for our
health and mental health
and as time went on in 2020 i started uh
hearing more and more of some of those
unintended consequences of logged in and
so i had difficulty towards the end of
2020 to continue uh to not
be able to to speak out on something
that
i felt defined our generation i worked
very it is well known that i worked very
hard within my government to try and
steer them into a different course but
in early january um i i realized that
we're probably not going to turn and all
i wanted to do jordan is to start a
conversation because there was no
conversation you people were afraid to
tell their best friend that their kid is
depressed because that would render you
a grammar killer of some sort and and i
was hoping that by issuing this this
public letter a conversation would start
would ensue and in fact thankfully uh it
started what i was also hoping for is
that a lot more leaders would follow a
lot more business leaders political
leaders union leaders trade leaders
whoever
academic leaders but but unfortunately
that did not happen much because of this
culture of fear
that has gagged everyone into silence
and and so since then um
i've been asked to leave caucus i lost
my chairmanship of the justice committee
but i'm i'm
at peace with my decision
and i'm grateful that i've been able to
give a voice to many canadians
yeah well i mean ford
obviously piloted ontario well enough to
in in the minds of the constituents to
win an overwhelming
uh majority in the last election and so
he steered um
a course that
seemed to be in accord with the desires
of the people
were you
surprised now i'm i have been personally
unhappy at least to some degree with the
degree to which mr ford has cozied up to
the federal liberals and also appalled
at some of the legislation for example
that his minister of education has
proposed i think that was bill c-67
which is an absolutely appalling piece
of legislation likely to die in ignominy
in any case but that's not precisely the
point
were you what was your personal
experience like
trying to make the case that you made
and then running into opposition from
your former compatriots
it's interesting to note that and and i
of course will not reveal any names or
or details and i will not breach
confidentiality of my former caucus but
i will say that it's well known that
that many have in fact shared my view
uh including um at times even the
premier himself and it's regretful and
it's i found it incredibly regretful
that
we didn't have the courage we didn't
have the political courage
to say enough
we have to reassess our response because
we're clearly harming people right if if
this was tax policy or or if we were
dealing dealing with you know highway
construction and and
fine i i understand why some people
might be more inclined to do politics
than others
but when it comes to human life and and
that's that's what i try to stress in
this exercise so subsequent to my
um expulsion from the conservative
caucus um i've been subjected to um
a lot of uh criticism
i would say pointed lightly by uh by our
opposition by by media and and others
but
and somehow there is this dispersion
where people try to suggest that you
don't care about life or or you want to
compromise life but i think it's
precisely the opposite
it's it was an intent to save lives and
in fact i think that this entire
exercise of the last couple years
dehumanized uh so many
people around the world in in fact as we
try to convey this collective sense goal
of of safetyism what we've in fact done
is the opposite is we've compromised
human life we've compromised human
ingenuity we've compromised we've
regressed our children considerably and
and and so so the goal was to to take a
holistic view and and so that's what i'm
upset uh by my friends
given recent scotus wins it feels like
the pendulum may be swinging back to a
time when the nuclear family was
situated at the center of american life
where real conversation learning and
growth began at home president ronald
reagan said in his farewell address that
all great change in america begins
around the dinner table well all great
meals in america begin with good
ranchers good ranchers cares deeply
about providing families with steakhouse
quality beef chicken and seafood meat at
a reasonable price their mission is to
bring people to the table making those
shared moments with your loved ones easy
accessible and delicious good rancher
ships 100 american meat born raised and
harvested in the u.s right to your door
plus when you subscribe your price is
locked in for the life of your
subscription great food creates great
conversation and great conversation
makes great change so start bringing
people back to the table with high
quality american meat go to
goodranchers.com peterson to get thirty
dollars off your first order plus free
shipping that's goodranchers.com
peterson
so i have it on good authority that a
lot of the decision-making around covet
policy specifically in ontario but also
at the federal level was not based on
so-called following the science which is
not an easy thing to do in any case but
on
continually conducted opinion polls and
that's problematic to me for two reasons
number one
as a psychologist
and a research psychologist i know
perfectly well that asking people
questions to find out what they really
think is unbelievably difficult and so
the way you you formulate the question
to a large part determines the
response you're going to get so for
example when trudeau here's a good good
indication when trudeau clamped down on
the truckers
the polls indicated that most canadians
supported his decision but at the same
time the polls indicated that his
popularity had plummeted and so what in
the world are you supposed to make of
that if you're polling and so if you're
a political leader and your
your guidance is polls first of all
you're relying on something that's
unbelievably unreliable
short-term sampling of public whim done
badly by people who don't have the
psychological credibility to answer the
questions properly and then as you said
you have a proclivity to forego your
principles now i know that the doug ford
government as well as the federal
liberals was relying on poll data to
make their decisions
and so you said even the premier agreed
with you at least in private in
relationship to the appalling
consequences of the lockdowns and the
abdication of political responsibility
to health care experts
so why didn't they have the courage of
their convictions
politics politics is
as i often say but it's stupid it's
stupid politics right because there's no
indication that following the polls in
that matter actually constitutes a
reasonable way forward so so politics is
the rot on on government it's it's the
cause of of almost everything that's bad
with government and i hope that we get
to get into that in a moment but
back to opinion polling for a moment
what's important to appreciate is that a
lot of that uh opinion is also shaped by
government itself and media well of
course and what was what we saw during
the covert pandemic was a vicious cycle
in that you you had public health come
out of course the media would pick up on
that and and would spread fear the
public would react with fear the
government would would feel that
intuitively and would act in response to
that fear even when it was completely
unwarranted
and and it was objectively unwarranted
and then in order to justify its own
decision subsequent to the fact the
government would add more fear
to to
right justify its action and so on it
went you know this is this is exactly
why we don't have a direct democracy you
know we have a parliamentary democracy
so there's a bit of a
space put in between government policy
and public feedback and response because
i think i think the reliance on opinion
polls as a replacement for parliament
does inevitably especially in social
media mediated times with the
acceleration of communication it does
inevitably produce these kinds of
vicious circle
vicious cycle feedback loops that you
just described
when when you don't have objective media
questioning the government uh right
because because the only thing we've
heard over the course of this pandemic
is
are you doing enough are you doing it
fast enough are you saving enough lines
how why haven't you acted sooner and so
on and so forth instead of asking is any
of this effective is any of this making
sense
are you factoring in the collateral harm
of what you're doing that was never
asked right which is the job that's the
fundamental job of politicians right
there because they abdicated their
responsibility to these public health
experts and decided that this narrow
target the narrow targets that you
described trumped every other political
and economic consideration in the short
medium and long term as an absolute
abdication of political and legislative
responsibility in the face of this
well what turned out to be not so
overwhelming threat and a collapse of
our institutions as a consequence the
the obligation of responsibility was to
their constituents was to the people
that that put them in office and and i
i've said before anyone with a working
cell phone
would have understood
the the mental health catastrophe of
course the economic catastrophe the
collapse of health care i think the one
of the greatest legacies of our pandemic
response is going to be the collapse of
healthcare in canada and we're seeing
that to some extent around the world uh
we have a trauma we have a post-trauma
in the workforce and that includes
health care
we we see that
we have a lot of conditions that went
undiagnosed that are now catching up
with us
we're diagnosing cancer a lot later than
we should be um and and so but so what
they have
done uh what the political class has
done effectively is they've abdicated
their responsibility to their
constituents and why did they do that
for politics they were afraid that
they're going to be canceled by the
radical
um covet i call it the covet mob
that that that would cancel them on
twitter that would uh dehumanize them or
or say that they don't care about lives
right and that's what effectively they
try to do to me is is they a lot of
politicians figure that they may uh be
asked to leave their own government
caucuses or caucuses if they went
against the grain uh and and therein
lies the classical agency conflict of of
politics in that uh it's it's inevitable
uh regretfully that politicians continue
to put themselves and and their offices
and their careers and their aspirations
ahead of what's what's right for for
their constituents and and nowhere it
has been true before i think to the
extent that it has been with our covert
response
so did this the fact that you did get
mobbed and excluded let's say
did that shake your faith in
well in you said it didn't shake your
faith in what you had to say
what did it do to your opinions of your
political colleagues and to your sense
of the functionality of the political
process in general in canada
look thankfully i've been able to
survive uh as i call it the covet mob
and and i've continued to work ever
since uh articulating sensible moderate
propositions that if if people want to
for instance avail themselves of of the
benefit that the vaccine offers then
they're certainly welcome to do so but
that doesn't mean that they should force
anyone else to do anything that they
don't want to do we've just never done
that before as western civilization you
can acknowledge that the virus can be
very very risky to certain demographics
but you can also be reasonable and say
look it's not about how many people get
coveted it's about who gets covet
because we all have different risk for
dispositions and and so that's what's
missing is that
we could have overcome this public
health emergency probably in a much
better way if we just allowed for some
sensible conversation which we haven't
and and so i'm grateful for the fact
that i've been able to continue to speak
on behalf of millions of canadians and
and that i think in part has brought me
to to today in that i feel that we need
to have the courage as the conservative
party
to to say what we believe and do what we
believe is right and and that how do you
think can how do you think cons okay so
the conservatives i've talked to in
canada over the last 10 years they do
have this
terror of the mob you know each of them
privately is afraid
that
they'll be targeted as you were by
the woke mob and taken out and that
they'll be abandoned by their colleagues
in doing so and that has put
conservatives to say it's put them on
the defensive is to say almost nothing
it's put them unbelievably on the
defensive why in the world did they
decide first of all
how do you think conservatives might be
able to protect themselves against that
and second why in the world did ford and
his people think that the right approach
to take to you was was to like dispense
with you in some sense why couldn't your
conversation
your objections be part of the ongoing
conversation why did they have to take
such a drastic move
look to to conservatives that that fear
speaking their minds they need to do
some self-reflection and determine why
they got into this business
right and and what is it that
differentiated us traditionally from the
liberal party is that we stuck to the
principle of principles right we never
sought popularity we never sought to to
be populist uh and appeal to the most
common denominator
instead we sought to implement sensible
policy and so if the goal is to say
what's popular and win elections
then then uh we lost the heart and soul
of the conservative party we do not
deserve we have not earned uh the vote
of canadians so so they need to think
about why they got into this business
and and do some self-reflection and the
second element of that is that those
that
are determined to do right by their
constituents and to do right by
canadians leadership needs to give them
cover
they need to know
that they um are free to to speak their
mind and and do the right thing
uh without suffering uh reprisal and and
so you can't restore democracy in our
country without restoring parliamentary
democracy as well it's something that
i'm very passionate about uh i like i
often say look i don't i don't work for
the boss i work for constituents and
that's what i'll expect if should i
should i win the leadership of my caucus
as well i'm not going to penalize an mp
for introducing legislation that's their
parliamentary right even if i'll vote
against it i'm not going to i'm not
going to punish them for disagreeing
with me because they're not expected to
parody me they're expected to serve the
people they that elected them otherwise
what do you even need parliament for
they could just vote by proxy or or just
increasingly we don't need parliament
right i mean and our federal government
is doing everything it possibly can to
make parliament merely an uh what an an
unnecessary impediment to their
woke utopian future
well and we're headed down that road
very rapidly well well that is a
disaster and um and and so parliamentary
democracy it also it's important to
understand that it spills to other
institutions right you have a lot of
close cooperation with industry and you
have to you have close cooperations with
regulators and so if if the people
around start a sensing that there is no
more dissent that is allowed and that's
in fact what in part i think contributed
very much to to the prevailing covet
response in that people in positions to
disagree
and and in fact affect a different
outcome like the colleges are physicians
like the colleges of nurses uh like the
teachers just decided that no we we're
going to
stick to to the messaging and we're not
going to allow for any dissent i'm of
the view that if if regulated health
professionals were able to freely
articulate their view and concerns over
the last couple of years we would have
been out of this mess yeah well that's
that's going complete that's gone
completely out the window so what's
happened among the for for healthcare
professionals speaking as one
is that the colleges have become
weaponized and so that anyone who has a
dissenting voice of any sort medically
on the nursing front social workers
psychologists
if they dare voice a dissenting opinion
the college will come down on them hard
with at so the college is the
professional body that regulates
independently in some sense of the
government regulates these professions
anyone in the world can take out a
complaint against me for example as a
psychologist for any reason whatsoever
because of something i said and the
college will launch an investigation
that tangles me up in six months worth
of legal trouble and substantive expense
so and i've talked to many physicians
who are absolutely unwilling to say what
they think about health the health of
their patients and about public health
in general because they are petrified
that the college will make their life a
living hell and destroy their
enterprise i've i've had multiple
conversations with the regulated health
professionals that uh wanted to speak
out but did not have uh courage to do so
because they faced those professional
repercussions but it's important in this
discussion not to lose sight of the fact
that
discussion and and expression is not
just important for democracy it's also
very important for public policy right
how can we make how can we make informed
decisions
when
our field of opinions is limited don't
you want
a greater baseline of of opinions so you
can
consider so you can weigh your options
uh informed options and and then come to
some sort of consensus as to what's
reasonable but when you have a when you
have silence
when when you don't have opinion you
inevitably have blind spots
intentionally or unintentionally and and
so it's not just back for democracy it's
terrible for public policy
right right well that was
also less we need to be reminded the one
of the major points of parliament was to
flesh out the ideas
on a broad across the broad range of
political ideas in as broad a manner as
possible to make policy more subtle and
nuanced and targeted and appropriate
it's just part of the process of
thinking it and it's true not just for
politics it's it's true for uh business
it's if you're coaching a sports team
and it's true for academia um
right and any good manager will tell you
that the best thing they can do for
their business is probably to surround
themselves with folks that might
disagree with them from time to time uh
and and so i don't know why we resent
that in in government uh this uniformity
of message um well trudeau turtle told
us why when he told us that he admired
the chinese communist party for their
efficiency and decision making capacity
in relationship to such things as
environmental policy why bother with all
that messy process of consultation and
thought when you already have the
answers handed down on high and all you
need to do is implement them as quickly
as possible
it's interesting because because that
that moment i think defined him very
much
and we're seeing that hubris
that arrogance
um almost there is a
thuggish approach to
to to others that we're seeing displayed
from my from the prime minister which is
why he's now
he has no i i don't know if canadians
have any idea at all
what a devastating hit
the international reputation of our
country has taken
and so all of the eastern europeans i
met a lot of eastern european
politicians in my last tour through
eastern europe and they are utterly
appalled by what's happened in canada
and then
in the united states
even among the democrats in the united
states
the fact that trudeau dared to suggest
that
american republicans
financed what was essentially an
insurrection attempt on canada's capital
is something so jaw-dropping like i said
even to the leftists in the u.s the
liberals and the leftists that it's it's
appalling and absurd nature can hardly
be overstated and then i'm thinking too
from a strategic perspective although i
don't think he ever does think
strategically
it's obvious to anyone with eyes that
the democrats are going to get
absolutely lambasted in november and
that means that sure and then probably
in the next presidential election as
well and so in all likelihood canada is
facing a conservative
republican-dominated monolith
in the united states on the governmental
front for the next four or five years
after biden departs
and that means that trudeau essentially
alienated
the biggest ally that canada has by
accusing those very same people of
fomenting of all the absurd things uh
anti-democratic insurrection in canada
it's just boggles the mind and then for
him to have frozen bank accounts as part
of the emergency act that there isn't i
don't think i talked to anyone in the
entire world over the last four months
who thought that that was
anything approximating a justifiable no
let's not say justifiable anything other
than an absolutely catastrophic decision
it shook everyone's faith in the
foundations of both canadian democracy
and the canadian financial system my my
first um when i first started practicing
law out of law school i i practiced
commercial litigation primarily and so i
was on the receiving end of of bank
account frozen and i froze a number of
accounts and it's so difficult to do so
in in canada or the united states you
have to meet a very high evidentiary
threshold
to ask the court to freeze a bank
account and here essentially uh bank
accounts of canadians were frozen on on
a phone call
right
and yeah and with no trials with no
trial for no hearing for something that
was made retroactively arguably unlawful
right it was retroactively unlawful and
and it wasn't just bad for our democracy
it was terrible for
investor confidence we know that there
was a very material risk of a run on the
bank
and it's it's not clear that any of that
in in any
uh circumstance was warranted but i want
to make an interesting point uh further
to uh you suggesting that they're
eastern european parliamentarians that
uh doubt whether canada is a democracy
anymore so you're correct generally i
think that our reputation around the
world has suffered immensely and so my
view on on foreign affairs is
we don't have the credibility to opine
on world events anymore uh until we fix
our democracy at home which is what my
run for the conservative leadership is
predicated on but it's also eastern
european canadians uh not not
not just them but but i i like to joke
that if you're from an eastern european
block and and myself included you have
been very nervous about what you've been
seeing for the last couple of years um
and and and that that what really scares
me and and i'm often asked do i see any
similarities between what i'm seeing in
canada today and and what i saw in the
soviet union as a kid and i'd say you
know jokingly sure i mean the lineups to
the liquor store that's that's always a
classic that's a classic
but beyond that it's when government
engages in remarkable activity that is
predicated on a false narrative
when when it does
extraordinary things very onerous
high-handed running rough shot over
people knowing that
the pretense for some such action the
narrative for such is false that's
indicative of those authoritarian
regimes and as i said to you we knew
we kept treating the virus as if this
was still march or april 2020 as if we
didn't learn anything would continue
this onerous response on on a false
narrative
and um that's that's what probably
scares me most because jordan if if you
can engage in remark if government can
engage in remarkable action on false
narrative then it can do essentially
whatever it wants for as long as it
wants
yeah well it's going to do the trudeau
government is going to do exactly the
same thing on the environmental front
and there's absolutely no doubt about
that and they're going to ride this
idiot
quasi-communist anti-capitalist ethos
that they're pushing like mad to the to
the ultimate degree we've already seen
most recently this week some of the
consequences of that unfolding similar
actions let's say unfolding in holland
where the farmers although they haven't
got much
media coverage surprise surprise are
doing in holland something or in the
netherlands something very similar to
what the truckers did in canada
right so the dutch government has made
it very difficult for farmers to ply
their trade because all they're doing
after all is growing food and who's
going to need that let's say come fall
when there's terrible shortage
and so we're seeing the
the consequences of this top-down heavy
authoritarian governance style in
western countries all over the world
you probably already know that there are
data brokers out there selling your
internet data off to companies who want
to serve you a targeted ad but you might
be surprised to learn that they're also
selling your information to the
department of homeland security and the
irs mask your digital footprint and
protect yourself with expressvpn one of
the easiest ways for brokers to
aggregate data and tie it back to you is
through your device's unique ip address
but when you're connected to expressvpn
your ip address is hidden making it much
more difficult for data brokers to
identify you expressvpn also encrypts
100 of network traffic to keep your data
safe from hackers on public wi-fi you
can download expressvpn on all your
devices your phone your computer even
your home wi-fi router just tap one
button and you're protected make sure
your online activity and data is
protected with the best vpn money can
buy visit
expressvpn.com
jordan right now and get three extra
months free that's expressvpn.com
jordan
look i i think
to some extent
now is an opportunity to have a
conversation uh with canadians with uh i
think throughout the world about where
the radical left and radical left-wing
ideology has gotten us over the last
couple of years
i i am seeing a sense of optimism
because i think the media is actually
turning on justin trudeau uh we
certainly see a different conversation
in the united states
uh and and so i i have uh a cause for
optimism that we can get a get around
this but
it it's important to note uh as we talk
about the environment that i think that
what transpired over the last couple of
years has actually
resulted in opportunity
for classical liberals for traditional
small d democrats to to have a
conversation about issues that we
couldn't speak about before right
i think i think the left has overplayed
its hand with covet they overplayed its
hand
and and so now uh i think canadian
conservatives should feel a lot more
comfortable to say things that we
otherwise would not have dreamt of
saying for instance we shouldn't be
afraid regardless but look
uh i think that we should comfortably
say that taxing sally ten dollars at the
gas pump whenever she fills up is
probably not going to affect climate
change
right it's it's probably not going to
factor into global temperatures we we
should canada produces less than a
percent and a half of all global
emissions and it's not clear that even
if we were to cut all of them that it
would make a material difference and so
instead we're just punishing canadians
with our environmental policy
that is something that the conservative
party had difficulty articulating uh
over the last couple of elections and
also canada could be supplying
cheap and reliable energy to the us
we could be doing the same for europe we
could be doing the same for china
and we could be so we could have our
cake on the energy front and eat it too
we could provide clean and and carefully
regulated fossil fuel energy supplies
on a global scale we could make
ourselves much more prosperous than we
already are by using our natural
resources properly and we could make
advances on the environmental front we
know for example with the americans that
they cut their carbon output for those
who are concerned about such things and
i don't happen to be one of them
particularly but they cut their carbon
output substantially by turning to
fracking and natural gas utilization and
no environmentalist preachers saw that
coming
i think canada's natural resources are a
blessing and and we should not bled and
i certainly will not let oil and gas be
cancelled and it's important not just
for our strategic and national interests
and our economic bottom line because
that's the only way we're going to get
out of our economic whole but it's also
good for the planet because canadians
can produce and derive energy cleaner
and and safer than any other nation on
earth
and and so i'm very interested not not
in just oil and gas but mining we have
an insatiable appetite around the world
for for precious metals and and minerals
uh i i'd like to look into into natural
gas as well uh i think if you're if
you're concerned about the environment
that you would certainly be more
interested in transporting oil and gas
by pipeline instead of transporting oil
by train which is very very risky um
i think you know as as we uh
come to think uh when as we look at this
conversation i think that we can solve
almost everything that ails canada right
now
with democracy and natural resources if
we just yeah well you know it's
definitely the case that the
conservatives on the environmental front
could be taking the moral high ground
back from the idiot environmentalists
because these are problems that we can
solve and the pathway to solving them is
actually laid forward quite clearly not
least by people like bjorn lomberg
who've produced an extremely detailed
road map i would say of how to move
forward in the face of the climate
changes that we may perhaps be
contributing to we're obviously going to
be able to adapt to them and they're
nowhere near as cataclysmic as the
doomsayers have prognosticated
constantly from al gore onward
so we can do this and we could do it
while
ensuring that everyone had abundant
resources that the poor didn't have to
freeze in the dark which seems to be the
leftist environmental approach to the
problem it's like who cares about
today's poor when we have poor and 100
years to worry about you know pretty
pretty sad bit of moralizing and
obviously one this war in in russia
with ukraine and with the west in
general has certainly brought home the
one of the consequences of
what foolish environmentally predicated
energy policy that's another thing that
canada can play a role in ameliorating
we don't just can't do this we must do
this yes you know half of canadians
there are a lot of estimates even before
uh the most recent inflationary crisis
is that almost half of canadians were
200 away from not being able to meet
their monthly obligations and so now
with with the price of gas effectively
doubling and and the price of of
everything and most notably food uh
significantly increasing canadian many
canadian families are vulnerable and we
cannot we cannot continue to have this
conversation over and over we need to
get serious and at least telegraph to
the market that we're willing to to
start and we're determined to develop
canada's natural resources that will
immediately give people uh some relief
and and which is why i'm really worried
also jordan if i may very quickly i'm
nervous about uh what's what's happening
in by way of our monetary policy so much
of this inflation is driven by food and
energy that i'm not sure that aggressive
tightening of our monetary policy is
going to make the traditional difference
that tightening would
and instead what we're doing is we're
significantly increasing the cost of
borrowing which means we're increasing
the cost of living on on many canadians
and and yeah that's exactly right well
there there are actually food shortages
and they're going to get a lot worse
especially with the fertilizer crisis
and so this isn't this inflation isn't
merely a consequence of runaway monetary
policy precisely yeah it is it is quite
the situation you know you could have
hardly hoped for a worse outcome to
entice canadians into over investing on
margin in real estate and then cranking
up the interest rates to
cut them off at the knees which is
exactly what's happening at the moment
it's important to appreciate that our
housing industry accounts for about a
third of our economy and and for many
people it's their life investment right
their principal residence can be their
way to save for retirement and the fact
that we continue to to try and undermine
uh the market even though we have to
focus on affordability for sure but we
also want to preserve value for for
people that work hard for it but beyond
that yes that the main cause in my view
for what's transpiring is not just the
printing we printed half a trillion
dollars with nothing in canada with
nothing to show for but but beyond that
it's the log downs in my view that are
responsible for this runaway inflation
we essentially we stop the supply chain
and its tracks a number of times we
reopen the economy so there's obviously
a spike in demand and supply is simply
not catching up to demand the market is
out of the people we can't get anything
you know penguin random house informed
me that they couldn't put out a double
edition of my book in any reasonable
amount of time my two books because they
can't get cardboard or paper that's
penguin random house a sheet of plywood
in british columbia is now a hundred
dollars you can't buy a vehicle for love
nor money
most most large-scale uh
appliances and that sort of thing
especially those that depend on chips
are an unbelievably scarce supply and
one in five container ships right now
across the world is locked in a port
somewhere unable to move because of
backups like we have no idea how much
damage we did to the supply chain and we
are by no means done with that
catastrophe no uh i like to joke i my
jeep started misfiring and i i gave it
to the dealership and and they told me
it's gonna take three weeks because
there are no car parts
so there's no car parts not not because
not because we printed so much money but
but because we simply stopped the supply
chain in his traps but there's another
reason for all of this and i think that
that's the tragedy of the labor market
that is the the remarkable unprecedented
catastrophe in our legal in our labor
market canadians uh have already
suffered from low productivity before
the pandemic but what i'm seeing right
now and speaking to many canadians and
and small businesses and medium
businesses businesses of all sizes is
that there's a remarkable shortage of
labor
and even though it appears as if uh
we're back to almost full employment
we're just north of five percent
unemployment which seems good but
productivity has not come back people
are working less people are not
those some continue to work remotely so
productivity is done is down and you
know primarily what i'm noticing and
that's something that i talk about a lot
is that the labor force has suffered a
post trauma from covet a lot of a lot of
i think canadians and others around the
world uh feel that uh something was
materially lost in the last couple of
years they're losing faith in
institutions they're estranged from
their family uh they're seeing erosion
of their democracy uh nothing's fun
anymore and and so that of course
translates itself into productivity and
and until we restore productivity we
will not catch up on supply and we will
not be able to catch up with inflation
demoralization yeah well canada
canadians what were 35 percent now
behind the americans in terms of
comparative productivity and the oecd
has prognosticated that will be the
worst performing industrial economy in
the world for the next 40 years it's a
disaster that's what canadians are
facing so that means in all likelihood
we'll be half as wealthy as the
americans in 10 years
that's what it looks like now when we
could be more wealth we could be
wealthier more prosperous than any
nation on earth with reasonable policy
i'm i'm not sure
how we get out of this in the short term
but i know i know the following for for
fact is that as soon as canadians start
feeling
that this public health episode is
behind us
when we feel that we no longer need
government intervention those that that
perceive risk
should certainly are welcome to
take mitigation steps
but for for many canadians to continue
to worry are they going to lose their
job if if they don't take a booster are
they going to have to work are they
going to have to work a minimum
wage job again if they have to wear a
mask for eight hours
are they going to be
told that
they might not be able to go to school
again next year
although when while government still
remains in in our faces so to speak the
the labor force has a difficulty
recovering we need to give people a
relief
by extricating government out of our
lives as quickly as possible
yeah well god only knows what's going to
happen when we face the next serious flu
because the the mortality rate for kovid
wasn't that high and as you pointed out
most of the people who died had were
very elderly often already passed their
stated life expectancy in the vast
majority of cases and also suffered from
a number of comorbidities
and so
and there's going to be a serious flu
epidemic in the near future because we
haven't had a serious flu for a number
of years and so it's an open question
now
what mortality rate will be deemed
acceptable by the public health mavens
and authoritarians who've now come to
run the government and to provide us
with the excuse to lock down yet again
like what if the next flu is half as
deadly as we thought kovit was going to
be are we going to lock everyone down
again
and if not why not where's the line now
that we've established the president
following in the aftermath of the bloody
ccp authoritarians
what what what it's no wonder that
people feel that something has been lost
because something was lost so this is
why it's so important that history
reflects on what happened fairly right i
never sought to minimize the risk of
covet it can be a very serious infection
for certain folks and and it can
regretfully be deadly for some but that
doesn't mean that we don't need to be a
forefront about objective metrics it
doesn't mean that we don't need to
factor the collateral harm and and
potentially rethink our response but but
beyond that i think it's very important
that history regards this this episode
fairly because canadians americans
people all over the world
in the free world have been subjected to
unprecedented government tactics
right the censorship the segregation the
psychological manipulation and if that
narrative somehow prevails and it
suggests that it saved lives
then then we will never fully
get our democracy back and we will never
fully go back to normal and those are
two propositions that i find
unacceptable we have to get our
democracy back we have to go back to
normal
and and that will also help us deal with
potentially the next public health
crisis because we should have the
courage to address it professionally and
and objectively
so
so let's turn a bit now to the actual
conservative party race
and uh
i i just looked at some stats this
morning about
popularity polling within the
conservative party itself and there are
there were six candidates although my
understanding is that patrick brown has
now
uh
withdrawn from the leadership race
so there are five remaining if i have
that right and um
pierre poliev has clearly has the lead
and jean charae is clearly in second
place um i asked charae's people by the
way if
they if he wanted to speak with me on
this podcast
as i said i've extended an opportunity
to all of the leaders
and my
the response i received as far as i can
tell although it wasn't exactly that
clear was that
the charade people decided i was too
toxic to associate with the aftermath of
the tweet i put out about a swimsuit
illustrated model and i guess they
thought that was a scandal which was
quite surprising to me because it was a
tempest in a teapot but in any case
polyeth seems to have about 45
of the
of the popular sport among those who are
going to vote in the conservative
leadership race and charade about 14 and
then
you and leslie lewis and scott hasson
are bringing up the rear what do you
expect and hope to what do you hope to
accomplish by your leadership race and
what do you see as the future for the
conservative party as the
vote occurs and there's a new leader
what and and how how do you hope to play
a role in that
so look of course we still see a path to
to winning although i'm i'm not under
any illusion that that we are uh not in
in first or second place i will not uh
comment on my friends and and how they
perceive or choose to conduct the race i
i think it's important for the
electorate uh itself to evaluate our uh
respective positions and approach to the
race
because this is really an audition for
the general election but what what i
think is important that
i've been blessed to contribute to the
conversation i'm glad that many of the
conservative candidates are coming
around on this question of democracy uh
initially a lot of the media speculated
that romans is going to talk about covet
and log down and that's behind us well
first of all 20 almost 20 of canadians
are still treated differently so it's
certainly not behind us but beyond that
now we're seeing uh all the other camps
coming around to our democracy message
and so that that is certainly something
that i was very much hopeful for and
grateful for that we get to push and
second of all uh i i think that
insisting that our party is not afraid
to stand for what it believes and that
we speak with clarity something that
i've tried to do throughout my career in
the last couple of years is is something
that i will demand from
and expect from the leadership of this
party the future leadership of this
party as the voters expect it from us
and that's the only way we're going to
prevail with with canadians is when they
believe
what we say and when we speak clearly
and we're not afraid uh to stand up for
all canadians unlike in the last couple
years
is there
i think we should switch over to the uh
to the other portion of this
conversation uh for those of you who are
listening i'm going to talk to mr
babbage some more behind the on the
daily wire plus website we're going to
talk a little bit more personally i
would say is there anything else
roman that you would like to bring to
the attention of canadians you you sort
of summed up there by pointing out that
you know you got pilloried pretty hard
for speaking your mind and the
leadership convention and race offers
you or the leadership race offers you an
opportunity to speak your mind again
show that that is possible and to bring
these attention these issues to the
attention of canadians which seems to me
to be a very
valid ambition is there anything else
that you'd like to say to people before
we
we move to the second part of this
conversation
i i don't see myself as as a victim of
the cancer culture mob on the contrary i
i saw what transpired as a remarkable
blessing
um i came to canada when i was 15 we
didn't have a cent to our name
and i've had every blessing this country
had to offer and i would encourage
canadians not to give up on canada i've
always felt that
this is the best country in the world
because all you need to do to succeed in
canada is work hard and be nice to
people and if you just do those two
things then everything will be okay and
we get to do that and still keep our
religious and cultural values and we get
to be ourselves and and i have a sense
of optimism as i said to you in the
beginning of this interview that that
even the media is turning on justin
trudeau and and with so many things that
we're concerned about that als right now
we can solve them as i said we just need
democracy and natural resources that
would alleviate a lot of the concern we
have right now as soon as government
extricates itself out of our lives we're
gonna breathe gonna breathe a sigh of
relief uh we know what to do to solve
this and uh i'm i'm incredibly grateful
to so many canadians coast to coast uh
with whom my message of democracy has
resonated and i'm also
i'm also thankful to all of my friends
in this race we have record membership
of 675 000 members it's it's something
to to the credit of all of them and it's
something to be proud of because that
means we're bringing a large motivated
base into our next election we have to
emerge out of this united and and firm
uh we cannot give up on our country nor
do we need to we are a wonderful country
and i'm optimistic about the future
great well that's a lovely place to end
and so uh thank you very much i've been
speaking today with mr roman babar who
is running for the leadership of the
federal conservative party in canada
hoping to lead that party and then to
challenge the reprehensible shall we say
justin trudeau for the position of prime
minister of canada in the next election
which can't come too soon in my humble
estimation thank you very much for
speaking with me today thank you so much
jordan